Are right let's do this logistic regression intuition and you could probably tell by my voice that I'm
pretty excited.
There's some very interesting slides coming up and this is quite an important topic.
But at the same time it is quite challenging so a quick heads up there will be some math and I've done
a few run through of this presentation already and I really will try my best to convey everything in
the simplest way possible.
So let's get into it.
We already know about the linear regression.
We know that there is a simple linear regression and it has a very short formula with one independent
variable.
And we also have looked into the multiple linear regression which has many independent variables.
So we already know how to deal with this type of challenge so when we have a scalpel like that where
on the horizontal axis we've got the independent variable on the vertical axis.
We've got the dependent variable and it's an example we looked at salary versus experience.
How do we create a model here.
So we use a simple linear regression.
It puts a line through our data and that line is modeling our observations.
So we can basically forecast things and compare our actual preservations to our model and so on.
But so we know how to deal with challenges like that or problems like that.
But your company had hired you as a data scientist.
What they do is they send out email offers to customers with like a proposal to buy certain products.
It might be a clothing store it might be a grocery store or something.
So what they do is basically they send out a offer in the in e-mail to a lot of customers to purchase
product.
And here you got a sample of those customers that they contacted recently you've got their age and also
you have a variable whether or not they took action.
So did the person take up an action to perform an action did they take up an offer.
Did they buy a product.
Did they open up an e-mail or respond to our e-mail and so on.
So was the action taken or not.
And the very black and white.
Very different.
But at the same time even though we don't know what to do We don't know what's going on here it's not
what we're expecting but at the same time intuitively we can see that there is some sort of correlation.
We can see that the observations on the bottom they're a bit more to the left observations on the top
are a bit more to the right implying kind of that's probably older people are more likely to take action
based on this offer.
And younger people are more likely to ignore it.
So can we somehow model this.
How about we try our existing method in our toolkit which is the linear regression.
Let's run Aleena aggression.
And that's what it looks like.
As you can tell it doesn't look like the best approach doesn't look like the best method to solve this
problem.
So let's look into this in a bit more detail.
We're going to draw the other horizontal line over here.
Instead of trying to predict exactly what's going to happen for any given person let's imagine a person
and let's say we want to predict for that person knowing their age we want to predict whether they will
take up the offer or not.
But instead of predicting exactly whether they're going to take it up or not.
How about instead we will predict the probability rules will state a probability or a likelihood of
that person taking up that offer.
And if you think of it in that way right away things start becoming clearer right away you can see that.
OK so this chart is actually from 0 to 1.
And I also know that probabilities are from 0 to 1.
Oh that's interesting.
So basically I could fit in probabilities between 0 and 1.
The fact that the red dots the red observations are already either 0 1 and nowhere in between.
Well that's simply because we already know the result.
We already know that they're either there or there but for something that we're predicting it kind of
makes sense to say well I don't know for sure I don't know 100 percent he'll take it up or not.
By no maybe maybe an 80 percent chance he'll take it up or not.
Right.
And when you think of it that way the linear regression line or at least that part that's in the middle
between 0 and 1.
It makes sense right.
Well it makes some sense because that is basically it's telling you that anybody between those ages
of for instance where it's crossing the horizontal line for the first time it might be.
Whereas Horten crossing the horizontal axis it might be like 25 or 35.
And whereas crossing a vertical or horizontal axis for one it might be let's say 55.
So those people between 35 and 55 they anything in-between.
Any person that falls in between that age there is a probability of them taking up this offer and their
probabilities is increasing as we move to the right as we take more and more older people are pre-build
is increasing.
So the part of the linear regression in the middle kind of makes sense and we we can do something with
it but the parts that don't make sense at all are the ones at the top at the bottom because a probably
can never be less than zero.
It can never be above 1.
So what is the linear regression trying to give us a hint about here.
Well what it's probably saying what we could interpret as is that people above that age that nominal
age we said 55 above that age they they are very very likely take off or actually more than more than
100 percent.
So basically they're definitely taking it up.
Anybody below 35 on the other side on the left they're definitely not taking it.
So essentially what we're saying is if we take that approach then we would have to replace the original
line with a line that looks like that so let's just cut those bits off and replace them with horizontal
parts and that would beer very basic but it still would be an attempt at creating a model for this situation.
So we would still be able to use this to make some sort of predictions and assumptions.
That's a lot that's talk about the correlation between the action and the age of a person.
So that's a very basic understanding and that's kind of the start of our understanding of intuition
behind logistic regression.
So let's see what the actual scientific approaches.
So here we've got the line that we looked at and it is described by this equation.
Now this part is going to be this is the most fun parts of Beruf me.
If you applied to this equation a sigmoid function which looks like that.
So you put the Y into the sigmoid function in purple and then you solve for y from the purple box and
you put y back into the blue box then you'll get the green box.
So basically your linear regression will start to look like this.
And this is the formula for logistic regression.
And what that will do to chart which is most important is this visual part it all converted from the
charter we see at the top to this new chart which is actually the logistic regression function.
So if at this stage you're asking yourself what just happened then.
You're not alone.
The first time I saw this or I learned this this was the expression on my face.
If you if you told me you feel totally comfortable for that that's super great that means you'll fly
through this section.
But if you're confused right now not a problem.
I was the same when I was in your shoes.
So let's take this step by step.
Let's look at it step by step exactly what happened.
So there's our graph there is our independent variable there is our outcome yes or no.
So that's the why the dependent variable.
And there are observations in our data set based on these observations.
And plus using this formula which we're going to take as given this is the logistic regression formula.
Using this formula and these observations we come up with this line and what is important to understand
here it's not a magical line.
This line for the logistic regression is the same as a slope or a trend line for a linear regression.
So basically what this line is doing is it is using the formula is following a formula and it's the
best fitting line that can fit these data.
And so basically we doing exactly the same thing as a for linear regression but it just looks different
that's all.
So there there are heaps of these lines that can you can draw that look like that but only one of them
is the best fitting line.
So the point of the logistic regression is to find that best fitting line.
And this is it.
So we found the best fitting line that follows that equation and fits these variables that we.
All these observations that we had in our data set.
After that we can forget about the equation we forget about the variables we've got on line.
So this is our logistic regression function we found it.
Same thing as with the linear regression we've created the model we've built the model you can see it.
This is the model in front of you right there.
Now what can we do if this logistic regression.
Well we can use it to predict probabilities and we're very touched on probabilities that they live between
0 and 1 and that instead of predicting for sure that something will or will not happen.
Hubble would predict probability.
So let's look at oh by the way probability here is called p hat.
So that that's a little sign about P gives it the name p hat and anything you see in the hat in the
section just basically means that it's something we're predicting so.
And that's that's a way to remember that picture.
So we're predicting this probability.
OK so let's take a for a random values for the independent variable for X.
We're going to say 20 30 40 50 let's see what happens with variables.
So let's put them on the X line.
Those are the dots.
And I specifically put dots not X's and crosses because it doesn't mean that they're on the horizontal
The bottom line doesn't mean that their probability is zero or that they're dependent variable is 0
and 0.
They just there because they're on the x axis we just plotted them there has nothing to do with the
vertical axis.
Now let's what you need to do to find the probabilities is you need to project these values onto your
curve.
Once you project them you get these blue light blue blue dots or blue observations we plotted basically.
So these are the fitted values as you remember in Grettel you have in red you have the actual And in
blue you have the fitted values.
So these are fitted values.
And now if you project them if you want the probabilities you need to project them to the left like
that and let's have a look at these possibilities so the person who's 20 years old the probability of
taking up this offer is very low.
Perhaps 0.7 percent so less than 1 percentage to take up this offer the person who's 30 years old.
The percent probability is higher is about 23 percent take up this offer the person who's 40 years old
they're probably take up the offers.
Eighty five percent according to this model and the person who's 50 years old there probably is ninety
nine point four percent.
So that's the first thing that you can get out of a logistic regression.
That's what we're going to be using very.
We're going to be using it very actively when we're talking about building Joe demographic segmentation
because you use this probability as a score and I will talk about this more so you can actually rank
people who is the most likely to take up your friend who's the least likely to take you up.
So it's actually even better than just having a one or a zero.
You have a probability so you can order people by this possibility anyway you might want to say.
Well I don't want probability.
I want a prediction as well because this is a regression.
I want a prediction for the the y value.
So OK we can do that.
Can we get let's get rid of those probabilities now.
Can we get the why the actual.
Obviously we can't get the actual Because the actual is something that we can only observe in our data
set or in real life.
We can only get a prediction for the actual.
So white hat as it has suggests is a predictive value for the dependent variable.
How do you get why.
Well the approach is very arbitrary.
You have to select a line.
Let's wait for that archive.
So you have to select a line.
In this case we're going to check 50 percent.
You can select it anywhere but 50 percent is jesús because it's in the middle and it's therefore you
have symmetry and anything below this line so anything that falls on the curve below this line will
be projected downwards onto the zero line.
Which makes sense so it's basically saying if you operability your predicted probability of taking up
this offer is less than 50 percent let's say it's 40 percent or 20 percent then we're just going to
say that you're not you're probably not going to take up this offer.
And so that's what's happening.
The person we're 0.7 percent the person or whatever it was 27 percent 23 percent their predicted their
probabilities are not zero but they're below 50 so you're if you're if you're if you do require a y
hat so a predicted value a yes or no value then makes sense that if something is below 50 percent you're
probably going to say that they're not going to take up the offer now.
And you think wow.
Yeah.
So they know both of them.
Why has a zero now anything above the horizontal line that was selected the 50 percent line it is agreed
that all of those values that fall onto the curve above that line are projected upwards they're projected
onto the yes like the one what line.
So the person that had a possibility of 85 percent is projected outwards and the person that had the
possibility of ninety nine point seven percent picked it up and also make sense right.
So if she if somebody is going to cha you predicting that somebody is possibility of taking up an offer
of 85 percent then if you have to say yes or no then you're probably going to say yes you're going to
say yes this person will take up the offer if you just if you have to choose one of the two.
So those are our predicted y hat values in this case they're both one for those two variables.
And those are the two things you can get out of you know logistic regression so you get the probabilities
which are important also you can get the Y had predicted values for the dependent variables.
Once again it's important to think of it as it's doing exactly the same thing as a linear regression.
It's
it's fitting this line even though it's not a straight line.
And the and the values are not scattered.
Everything looks bizarre in its uniformity or in the structure its structure makes it look very bizarre
but still it's it's a pretty much the same way we've agreed on a line or a formula for a curve and we're
trying to fit the best curve to our daughter.
Once we've done that we've got we've got a model we've got the coefficients which we'll talk about later
and we can start drawing conclusions or insights from this model and some of the insights are we can
get a probability of somebody taking action or of the event occurring and or basically the answer being
yes so it's not a yes no it's a probability so 85 percent or 20 percent or whatever so that's when we
projected to the left onto the y axis.
And also we can get a predicted value for the depende Berbel based on where we select this arbitrary
line 50 percent you can select it anywhere you like you can say a higher or lower depends on your knowledge
about the problem at hand.
And as you as you understand depending on where you selected that will significantly affect your variables.
So I really hope this explanation was trivial enough and yet insightful enough for you to gain an intuitive
understanding of logistic regression.
I look forward to seeing you then and until next time happy analyzing.